Configuration form for module with symfony style (#1696)
PrestaShop/docs: modules/creation/adding-configuration-page-modern.md

---
title: Modern configuration page
weight: 4
---

# Adding a configuration page with Symfony forms

With the new Symfony architecture, [there is a much modern way of integrating settings forms]({{<relref "/8/development/architecture/migration-guide/forms/settings-forms">}}) (`Configure` action) for your modules. 

> In the first part of this guide, we will explain how to implement such a mecanism in a module. We will create a module, with a dedicated configuration page, with a simple configuration field. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first part of this guide, we will explain how to implement such a mechanism in a module. We will create a module with a dedicated configuration page consisting of a simple configuration field. 
```

> In the second part of this guide, we will list and illustrate the other form types (field types) availables. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This is no longer relevant, right?

{
    /**
     * {@inheritdoc}
     */
    public function buildForm(FormBuilderInterface $builder, array $options): void
    {
        $builder
            ->add('config_text', TextType::class, [
                'label' => $this->trans('Configuration text', 'Modules.DemoSymfonyFormSimple.Admin'),
            ]);
    }
}
```

This form has only one setting : `config_test`, of type `Symfony\Component\Form\Extension\Core\Type\TextType`. 

### Register your newly created form type

Create a `services.yml` file in `config/`. 

```yml
services:
  _defaults:
    public: true

  # Demo configuration text form
  prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.type.demo_configuration_text:
    class: 'PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form\DemoConfigurationTextType'
    parent: 'form.type.translatable.aware'
    public: true
    tags:
      - { name: form.type }
```

This `services.yml` file is registering your `PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form\DemoConfigurationTextType` class as `prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.type.demo_configuration_text`. It also add a tag `name: form.type`, and declares it as `public`. 

{{% notice note %}}

> More informations about services in [Symfony official documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/service_container.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read more about services in the [official Symfony official documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/service_container.html)
```

{{% /notice %}}

## Create the Data configuration

Create a `DemoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration.php` file in `src/Form`.

```php
<?php
declare(strict_types=1);

namespace PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form;

use PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Configuration\DataConfigurationInterface;
use PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\ConfigurationInterface;

/**
 * Configuration is used to save data to configuration table and retrieve from it
 */
final class DemoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration implements DataConfigurationInterface
{
    public const DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE = 'DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE';

    /**
     * @var ConfigurationInterface
     */
    private $configuration;

    /**
     * @param ConfigurationInterface $configuration
     */
    public function __construct(ConfigurationInterface $configuration)
    {
        $this->configuration = $configuration;
    }

    /**
     * {@inheritdoc}
     */
    public function getConfiguration(): array
    {
        $return = [];

        if ($textSimple = $this->configuration->get(static::DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE)) {
            $return['config_text'] = $textSimple;
        }

>         return $return;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        $return = [];

        $return['config_text'] = $this->configuration->get(static::DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE);

        return $return;
```

isn't it enough?

    }

    /**
     * {@inheritdoc}
     */
    public function updateConfiguration(array $configuration): array
    {
        $this->configuration->set(static::DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE, $configuration['config_text']);
    
        /* Errors are returned here. */

>         return [];

Reviewer: Let's add a simple validation. For example, if the field's length is longer than 32 chars, we throw an error.

    }

    /**
     * Ensure the parameters passed are valid.
     *
     * @param array $configuration
     *
     * @return bool Returns true if no exception are thrown
     */
    public function validateConfiguration(array $configuration): bool
    {
        return true;
    }
}
```

> This Data configuration maps the `config_text` from the Form type to the `DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE` configuration data key. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DemoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration` maps the `config_text` from the Form Type to the `DEMO_SYMFONY_FORM_SIMPLE_TEXT_TYPE` configuration data key. 
```

wdyt?

### Register the Data configuration

In `config/services.yml`, register your newly created `DemoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration`: 

```yml

>   prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.demo_configuration_text_data_configuration:

Reviewer: Maybe better use `autowire`? 🤔

Author: can you show me ? not sure i can do it

    class: PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form\DemoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration
    arguments: ['@prestashop.adapter.legacy.configuration']
```

## Create the form data provider

Create a `DemoConfigurationTextFormDataProvider.php` file in `src/Form`.

```php
<?php
declare(strict_types=1);

namespace PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form;

use PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Configuration\DataConfigurationInterface;
use PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Core\Form\FormDataProviderInterface;

/**

>  * Provider ir responsible for providing form data, in this case it's as simple as using configuration to do that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Provider is responsible for providing form data, in this case, it is returned from the configuration component
```

how does it sound?

 *
 * Class DemoConfigurationTextFormDataProvider
 */
class DemoConfigurationTextFormDataProvider implements FormDataProviderInterface
{
    /**
     * @var DataConfigurationInterface
     */
    private $demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration;

    /**
     * @param DataConfigurationInterface $demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration
     */
    public function __construct(DataConfigurationInterface $demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration)
    {
        $this->demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration = $demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration;
    }

    /**
     * {@inheritdoc}
     */
    public function getData(): array
    {
        return $this->demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration->getConfiguration();
    }

    /**
     * {@inheritdoc}
     */
    public function setData(array $data): array
    {
        return $this->demoConfigurationTextDataConfiguration->updateConfiguration($data);
    }
}
```

### Register the form data provider

In `config/services.yml`, register your newly created `DemoConfigurationTextFormDataProvider`: 

```yml

>   prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.demo_configuration_text_form_data_provider:

Reviewer: autowire?

Author: same, can you show me how you would simplify ?

    class: 'PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Form\DemoConfigurationTextFormDataProvider'
    arguments:
      - '@prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.demo_configuration_text_data_configuration'
```

## Create and register the form handler

> For this form handler, we don't need to create a new class, we can use PrestaShop native's one.

Reviewer: I feel like it would be great to explain the magic underneath a bit more.

use PrestaShopBundle\Controller\Admin\FrameworkBundleAdminController;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Request;
use Symfony\Component\HttpFoundation\Response;

class DemoConfigurationController extends FrameworkBundleAdminController
{
    public function index(Request $request): Response
    {
        $textFormDataHandler = $this->get('prestashop.module.demosymfonyformsimple.form.demo_configuration_text_form_data_handler');

        $textForm = $textFormDataHandler->getForm();
        $textForm->handleRequest($request);

        if ($textForm->isSubmitted() && $textForm->isValid()) {
            /** You can return array of errors in form handler and they can be displayed to user with flashErrors */
            $errors = $textFormDataHandler->save($textForm->getData());

            if (empty($errors)) {
                $this->addFlash('success', $this->trans('Successful update.', 'Admin.Notifications.Success'));

                return $this->redirectToRoute('demo_configuration_form');
            }

            $this->flashErrors($errors);
        }

        return $this->render('@Modules/demosymfonyformsimple/views/templates/admin/form.html.twig', [

>             'demoConfigurationForm' => $textForm->createView(),

Reviewer: We could mention that in v8 you can also set the form theme from here.

Author: can you point me to this feature ? not sure i understand this one

        ]);
    }
}
```

{{% notice note %}}

> More informations about controllers on [Controller & routing]({{<relref "/8/development/architecture/modern/controller-routing">}}) and [Symfony official documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/controller.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can read more about controllers in [controller & routing section]({{<relref "/8/development/architecture/modern/controller-routing">}}) and [in the official Symfony documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/controller.html)
```

{{% /notice %}}

### Create a route for the configuration controller

Create a `routes.yml` file in `config/`. 

```yml
demo_configuration_form:
  path: /demosymfonyformsimple/configuration
  methods: [GET, POST]
  defaults:
    _controller: 'PrestaShop\Module\DemoSymfonyFormSimple\Controller\DemoConfigurationController::index'
    # Needed to work with tab system
    _legacy_controller: AdminDemoSymfonyFormSimple
    _legacy_link: AdminDemoSymfonyFormSimple
```

{{% notice note %}}

> More informations about routing on [Controller & routing]({{<relref "/8/development/architecture/modern/controller-routing">}}) and [Symfony official documentation](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/routing.html)

Reviewer: Duplicate?

{{% /notice %}}

## Add this route to the getContent() method of the module

The `getContent()` method of a module is the method called when accessing the configuration page of the module. 

Add this method to your module, with a redirection to the route previously registered.

```php
  public function getContent()
  {

>       $route = SymfonyContainer::getInstance()->get('router')->generate('demo_configuration_form');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      $route = $this->get('router')->generate('demo_configuration_form');
```

That should do it.

      Tools::redirectAdmin($route);
  }
```

## Install and enable your module

> Go to the Back Office, and in Modules, find your module, then install and enable it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to the Back Office, and in Modules Manager, find your module and install it. 
```

the module will be enabled after installation

{{% notice note %}}
You can also install it via CLI: 

```
php bin/console prestashop:module install demosymfonyformsimple
php bin/console prestashop:module enable demosymfonyformsimple
```
{{% /notice %}}

## Navigate / test your configuration form

Open your browser, and navigate to `Back Office > Modules`.

Then, find your module (`Demo symfony form configuration`), and click on the `Configure` button. 

## Complete example module

The module created in this guide is available [here](https://github.com/PrestaShop/example-modules/tree/master/demosymfonyformsimple).

## Other form types

You can use all [native Symfony Form Types](https://symfony.com/doc/4.4/reference/forms/types.html), and the PrestaShop specific ones: [see Form Types reference]({{<relref "/8/development/components/form/types-reference">}}).

{{% notice note %}}
Please refer to this example module for a complete implementation of those fields: [DemoSymfonyForm](https://github.com/PrestaShop/example-modules/tree/master/demosymfonyform)
{{% /notice %}}

### Required Javascript for some types

> Some types requires Javascript initializations to properly work. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some types require JavaScript component initialization to work correctly. 
```

Add a JS file to your form's twig template: 

```html
{% block javascripts %}
  {{ parent() }}
  <script src="{{ asset('../modules/demosymfonyform/views/js/form.js') }}"></script>
{% endblock %}
```

> And add the Javascript code to this JS file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And add the following JavaScript code to this file:
```

Reviewer: It's great that you mention it, but there's no direct correlation between your guide and this. Maybe if you limit the field length to 32 chars and use `TextWithLengthCounter`?

```js
$(document).ready(function () {
    // Learn more about components in documentation
    // https://devdocs.prestashop.com/8/development/components/global-components/
    window.prestashop.component.initComponents(
        [
            'TranslatableField',
            'TinyMCEEditor',
            'TranslatableInput',
            'GeneratableInput',
            'TextWithLengthCounter',
        ],
    );

    window.prestashop.instance.generatableInput.attachOn('.js-generator-btn');
    new window.prestashop.component.ChoiceTree('#form_category_choice_tree_type');
});
```

{{% notice note %}}

> The Javascript dependencies of specific types are [described in the Field's type reference]({{<relref "/8/development/components/form/types-reference">}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JavaScript dependencies of specific types are [described in the form types reference]({{<relref "/8/development/components/form/types-reference">}})
```

{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice note %}}

> Please refer to this example module for a complete implementation of those fields with Javascript: [DemoSymfonyForm](https://github.com/PrestaShop/example-modules/tree/master/demosymfonyform)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check this module to see an example of using JavaScript components: [DemoSymfonyForm](https://github.com/PrestaShop/example-modules/tree/master/demosymfonyform)
```
